= Incompatible and important changes since the BioRuby 1.3.1 release

A lot of changes have been made to the BioRuby after the version 1.3.1
is released.

== New features

== Deprecated classes

== Incompatible changes

=== Bio::KEGG

==== #dblinks

In Bio::KEGG::COMPOUND, DRUG, ENZYME, GLYCAN and ORTHOLOGY, the method
dblinks is changed to return a Hash. Each key of the hash is a database name
and its value is an array of entry IDs in the database. If old bahavior
(returns raw entry lines as an array of strings) is needed, use
dblinks_as_strings.

==== #pathways

In Bio::KEGG::COMPOUND, DRUG, ENZYME, GENES, GLYCAN and REACTION, the
method pathways is changed to return a Hash. Each key of the hash is a
pathway ID and its value is the description of the pathway.

In Bio::KEGG::GENES, if old behavior (returns pathway IDs as an Array) is
needed, use pathways.keys.

In Bio::KEGG::COMPOUND, DRUG, ENZYME, GLYCAN, and REACTION, if old behavior
(returns raw entry lines as an array of strings) is needed, use
pathways_as_strings.

Note that Bio::KEGG::ORTHOLOGY#pathways is not changed (returns an array
containing pathway IDs).

==== #orthologs

In Bio::KEGG::ENZYME, GENES, GLYCAN and REACTION, the method orthologs is
changed to return a Hash. Each key of the hash is a ortholog ID and its
value is the name of the ortholog. If old behavior (returns raw entry lines
as an array of strings) is needed, use orthologs_as_strings.

==== #genes

In Bio::KEGG::ENZYME#genes and Bio::KEGG::ORTHOLOGY#genes is changed to
return a Hash that is the same as Bio::KEGG::ORTHOLOGY#genes_as_hash.
If old behavior (returns raw entry lines as an array of strings) is needed,
use genes_as_strings.

==== Bio::KEGG:REACTION#rpairs

Bio::KEGG::REACTION#rpairs is changed to return a Hash. Each key of the
hash is a KEGG Rpair ID and its value is an array containing name and type.
If old behavior (returns as tokens) is needed, use rpairs_as_tokens.

=== Bio::KEGG::ORTHOLOGY

Bio::KEGG:ORTHOLOGY#dblinks_as_hash does not lower-case database names.

=== Bio::RestrictionEnzyme

Format validation when creating a object is turned off because of
efficiency.

